---
layout: post
title: COMP2511
---

## Introduction to the Java Platform

  * It's a platform independent language.
  * Source code is compiled by java compiler and turned into java byte-code.
  * Java byte-code is intrepreted by the JVM on any platform.

<br>

## Objects and Classes

  * Objects are real-world entities that have state (attributes) and behaviour (methods).
  * They can be tangible or intangible i.e. a phone or an account. 
  * Group objects that share common properties and behaviours into a **class**.
  * Objects have state, classes don't.

<br>

## Constructors and Instance Variables

  * A constructor is a special method that typically is used to initialise objects -- it is a method that is
  called when an object is created.
  * Instance variables are variables that are declared in a class and therefore define the members of an object instance.
  * Similarly, instance methods are methods that are declared in a class and therefore define the behaviours of an object instance.

<br>

## Object References

  * Objects created from the same class will have different memory space, and as such, have their own
  references.

<br>

## Unified Modelling Language

  * UML is an open-source, graphical language to model software solutions, application structures and business processes.
  * There are two types of UML diagram -- structural and behavioural.

<br>

## Key Object-oriented Principles

### Abstraction

  * Hide all but the relevant data about an object in order to reduce complexity and increase efficiency.
  * Implemented through the use of access specifiers **public** and **private**.

  * Avoids code duplication, increases reusability.
  * Can change internal implementation of class without affecting user.
  * Increases security as only important details are provided to user.

### Encapsulation

  * The bundling of data and methods that manipulate them, under a single unit.
  * Implemented through the use of **classes**, **getters** and **setters**.

  * Encapsulation leads to abstraction as it implies hiding the object's attributes.
  * Furthermore, it ensures an object is in a consistent state.

### Inheritance

  * The mechanism modelling a relationship between classes -- the creation of a child based upon a parent.
  * This is done as parents represent more general concepts, and children represent more specialised concepts.
  * Inheritance models **"is-a"** types of relationships i.e. a manager **"is-a"** type of employee.

  * Child can extend parent class defining additional properties and behaviours.
  * Child can override methods in parent with their own specialised behaviour.
  * Inheritance relationships form tree-like heirarchical structures.
  * Don't use inheritance unless all or most inherited attributes and methods make sense.

### Polymorphism

  * Ability of an object to take on many forms.
  * Any object that passes more than one **"is-a"** test is considered polymorphic.

  * Implemented by method/operator overloading (static) or method overriding (dynamic).

<br>

## Other Relationships

  * Look at this more later, but there are "has-a" relationships which fall under compoisition -- would require a class reference within another class as opposed to extending a class.
  * Along with compoisition there is association, aggregation.

<br>

## Summary of "Introduction to OOP in Java"

### Designing classes

  * Try keep data private.
  * Always initalize data.
  * Break up classes with too many responsibilities.
  * Use is-a and has-a relationships by factoring out common attributes and behaviours between multiple classes.
  * Method forwarding technique: using a member of an object results in using a corresponding member of a different object.

  <br>

  * Abstract classes define **only** part of an implementation. Benefit is that methods are declared such that interface is known but methods can be implemented differently in different subclasses.
  * Abstract class rules:
    * If class includes abstract methods, class must be abstract.
    * Abstract classes **cannot** be instantiated.
    * A subclass of an abstract class **can** be instantiated if **all** abstract methods of superclass are overridden and implemented.
    * If subclass of abstract class **does not** implement all abstract methods it inherits, that subclass is abstract.
  
  <br>

  * In java there is only single inheritance, no multiple inheritance but **interface** can be used to add multiple inheritance.

### Interfaces in Java

  * Are like abstracts with following differences:
    * All methods in an interface are **implicitly abstract**.
    * Variables declared must be **static and final** i.e. constants.
    * Classes can "implements" more than one interface.
    * If implementing an interface, a class must declare so, and, provide an implementation for all abstract methods of the interface(s).  
  * You can create sub-interfaces with **extends**.
  * Sub-interface inherits all abstract methods and constants and may define new methods and constants.
  * Interfaces can extend more than one interface at a time.

### Method Forwarding

  * Create an instance of a class X in class Y, this allows you to access all members methods/variables in class X from Y by forwarding any arguments.

### Method Overriding (Polymorphism)

  * When methods are defined across a superclass and subclass with the same name and return type, the method of the **superclass** is overridden with the method defined in the **subclass**. We can still reference overriden data from the **superclass** by using the ``super`` keyword.
  * You cannot call ``super`` on ``super`` i.e. ``super.super`` in java.
  * If you have three classes A, B and C where B is a subclass of A and C is a subclass of B, and all define an ``f()``.
    * Calling ``super.f()`` from B will call A's ``f()``.
    * Calling ``super.f()`` from C will call B's ``f()`` -- you cannot call A's ``f()`` from C.
      * The only exception is if B doesn't define it's own ``f()``, B and both C will inherit A's ``f()`` which can be called using ``super.f()``.

  <br>

  * So, polymorphism, is an object's ability to decide what method to apply to itself depending on where it is in the inheritance hierarchy.

### Method Overloading

  * You can define methods with the same name and return type but different parameters and use whichever you require. This is because Java can distinguish which method you are calling by parsing the number, type and positions of the arguments you have passed with a function call.

### Data Hiding and Encapsulation

  * Public → Visible to the world.
  * Private → Visible only within the class.
  * Protected → Visible to the Package and Subclasses.
  * No Modifier → Visible to the Package.

### Constructors

  * Good practice to define required constructor for all classes.

