---
layout: post
title: COMP3311
---

## DB Overview

  * Standard software engineering process (those marked with a * will not be covered in this course):

    1. Analyse application requirements*
    2. Develop a data model to meet these requirements
    3. Check data model for redundancy (using relation theory)
    4. Implement the data model as a relation schema
    5. Define operations (transactions) on this model*
    6. Implement operations via SQL and procedural PLs
    7. Construct a program interface to these operations
    8. Monitor performance and "tune" the schema/operations*

  * Typical environment includes clients i.e. psql which talks to a server running a query engine which writes to a database (data stored on disk).
  * SQLite is not a client-server system, its query engine is compiled into the client.

<br>

## Data Modelling

  * Aim is to describe **information** contained in database, **relationships** between data items and **constraints** on data.
  * Data models are either **logical**, in that they are abstract (ER, ODL, UML) or **physical**, meaning that they are record-based, and for implementation (relational, SQL).
  * Our strategy is to design using **logical** models and map it to a **physical** model.

### Design Ideas

  * Start simple.
  * Identify objects and their properties, then relationships.
  * Most designs involve kinds of people.
  * Keywords suggest data/relationships (rule-of-thumb: nouns = data, verbs = relationships).
  * Don't confuse operations with relationships i.e. buys vs owns.
  * Consider all possible data, not just what is available.
  * Most important aspects of a data model are **correctness**, **completeness** and **consistency**.
  * Potential inadequacies are **omitting necessary information**, **redundant information** which can lead to inconsistency, an inefficient implementation or violating syntatic or semantic rules of data models.

<br>

## ER Model

### Entity-Relationship Data Modelling

  * World is view as a collection of inter-related entities.
  * ER has three major modelling constructs:
    * Attribute: data item describing a property
    * Entity: Collection of attributes describing objects of interest.
    * Relationship: Association between entities.

### Entity-Relationship Diagrams

  * Graphical tool for data modelling.
  * ER diagram consists of:
    * Entity set definitions.
    * Relationship set definitions.
    * Attributes associated with entity and relationship sets.
    * Connections between entity and relationship sets.

  <br>

  * Rectangle → Entity.
  * Oval → Attribute.
  * Diamond → Relationship.
  
  <br>

  * An underline indicates that the attribute is unique.
  * Arrow → At most, there is one of the entity being pointed to associated with the entity where the arrow originates.
  * A thick line indicates the association is required.
  * No arrows means multiple associations may exist.

  <br>

  * Composite attribute: Is a grouping of related attributes.
  * Derived attribute: Derived from a computation performed on an attribute.
  * Multivalued attribute: Multiple values associated with it.

## Relational Model

## ER to Relational Mapping